Cryogenic electron tomography is a technique for imaging biological samples in 3D. A microscope collects a series of 2D projections of the sample, and the goal is to reconstruct the 3D density of the sample called the tomogram. Reconstruction is difficult as the 2D projections are noisy and can not be recorded from all directions, resulting in a missing wedge of information. Tomograms conventionally reconstructed with filtered back-projection suffer from noise and strong artefacts due to the missing wedge. Here, we propose a deep-learning approach for simultaneous denoising and missing wedge reconstruction called DeepDeWedge. The algorithm requires no ground truth data and is based on fitting a neural network to the 2D projections using a self-supervised loss. DeepDeWedge is simpler than current state-of-the-art approaches for denoising and missing wedge reconstruction, performs competitively and produces more denoised tomograms with higher overall contrast.

Transposon (IS200/IS605)-encoded TnpB proteins are predecessors of class 2 type V CRISPR effectors and have emerged as one of the most compact genome editors identified thus far. Here, we optimized the design ofDeinococcus radiodurans(ISDra2) TnpB for application in mammalian cells (TnpBmax), leading to an average 4.4-fold improvement in editing. In addition, we developed variants mutated at position K76 that recognize alternative target-adjacent motifs (TAMs), expanding the targeting range of ISDra2 TnpB. We further generated an extensive dataset on TnpBmax editing efficiencies at 10,211 target sites. This enabled us to delineate rules for on-target and off-target editing and to devise a deep learning model, termed TnpB editing efficiency predictor (TEEP;https://www.tnpb.app), capable of predicting ISDra2 TnpB guiding RNA (ωRNA) activity with high performance (r> 0.8). Employing TEEP, we achieved editing efficiencies up to 75.3% in the murine liver and 65.9% in the murine brain after adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector delivery of TnpBmax. Overall, the set of tools presented in this study facilitates the application of TnpB as an ultracompact programmable endonuclease in research and therapeutics.

Identification of bacterial protein–protein interactions and predicting the structures of these complexes could aid in the understanding of pathogenicity mechanisms and developing treatments for infectious diseases. Here we developed RoseTTAFold2-Lite, a rapid deep learning model that leverages residue–residue coevolution and protein structure prediction to systematically identify and structurally characterize protein–protein interactions at the proteome-wide scale. Using this pipeline, we searched through 78 million pairs of proteins across 19 human bacterial pathogens and identified 1,923 confidently predicted complexes involving essential genes and 256 involving virulence factors. Many of these complexes were not previously known; we experimentally tested 12 such predictions, and half of them were validated. The predicted interactions span core metabolic and virulence pathways ranging from post-transcriptional modification to acid neutralization to outer-membrane machinery and should contribute to our understanding of the biology of these important pathogens and the design of drugs to combat them.

Scarcity of structural and evolutionary information on protein complexes poses a challenge to deep learning-based structure modelling. We integrate experimental distance restraints obtained by crosslinking mass spectrometry (MS) into AlphaFold-Multimer, by extending AlphaLink to protein complexes. Integrating crosslinking MS data substantially improves modelling performance on challenging targets, by helping to identify interfaces, focusing sampling, and improving model selection. This extends to single crosslinks from whole-cell crosslinking MS, opening the possibility of whole-cell structural investigations driven by experimental data. We demonstrate this by revealing the molecular basis of iron homoeostasis inBacillus subtilis.

Generative deep learning models enable data-driven de novo design of molecules with tailored features. Chemical language models (CLM) trained on string representations of molecules such as SMILES have been successfully employed to design new chemical entities with experimentally confirmed activity on intended targets. Here, we probe the application of CLM to generate multi-target ligands for designed polypharmacology. We capitalize on the ability of CLM to learn from small fine-tuning sets of molecules and successfully bias the model towards designing drug-like molecules with similarity to known ligands of target pairs of interest. Designs obtained from CLM after pooled fine-tuning are predicted active on both proteins of interest and comprise pharmacophore elements of ligands for both targets in one molecule. Synthesis and testing of twelve computationally favored CLM designs for six target pairs reveals modulation of at least one intended protein by all selected designs with up to double-digit nanomolar potency and confirms seven compounds as designed dual ligands. These results corroborate CLM for multi-target de novo design as source of innovation in drug discovery.

Systemic amyloidosis involves the deposition of misfolded proteins in organs/tissues, leading to progressive organ dysfunction and failure. Congo red is the gold-standard chemical stain for visualizing amyloid deposits in tissue, showing birefringence under polarization microscopy. However, Congo red staining is tedious and costly to perform, and prone to false diagnoses due to variations in amyloid amount, staining quality and manual examination of tissue under a polarization microscope. We report virtual birefringence imaging and virtual Congo red staining of label-free human tissue to show that a single neural network can transform autofluorescence images of label-free tissue into brightfield and polarized microscopy images, matching their histochemically stained versions. Blind testing with quantitative metrics and pathologist evaluations on cardiac tissue showed that our virtually stained polarization and brightfield images highlight amyloid patterns in a consistent manner, mitigating challenges due to variations in chemical staining quality and manual imaging processes in the clinical workflow.

Authors and AffiliationsNature Computational Sciencehttps://www.nature.com/natcomputsciFernando ChirigatiAuthorsFernando ChirigatiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarCorresponding authorCorrespondence toFernando Chirigati.

The nature of dark matter remains one of the greatest unanswered questions in science. The largest concentrations of dark matter appear to lie in galaxy clusters. By modifying the properties of dark matter, the distribution of mass in clusters is altered in an observable way. However, uncertain astrophysical mechanisms also alter the mass distribution, often mimicking the effect of different dark matter properties. Here I present a machine learning method that ‘learns’, from simulations, how the impact of dark matter self-interactions differs from that of astrophysical feedback. In the idealized case, my algorithm is 80% accurate at identifying whether a galaxy cluster harbours collisionless dark matter, dark matter with a self interaction cross-section,σDM/m= 0.1 cm2g−1or dark matter withσDM/m= 1 cm2g−1. It is found that weak-lensing information primarily differentiates self-interacting dark matter, whereas X-ray information disentangles different models of astrophysical feedback. The data are forward modelled to imitate observations from Euclid and Chandra, and it is found that the model has a statistical error ofσDM/m< 0.01 cm2g−1and is insensitive to shape-measurement bias and photometric-redshift errors. This method represents a way to analyse data from upcoming telescopes that are an order of magnitude more precise and many orders faster than current methods, enabling us to explore the properties of dark matter like never before.

Untargeted metabolomic analysis using mass spectrometry provides comprehensive metabolic profiling, but its medical application faces challenges of complex data processing, high inter-batch variability, and unidentified metabolites. Here, we present DeepMSProfiler, an explainable deep-learning-based method, enabling end-to-end analysis on raw metabolic signals with output of high accuracy and reliability. Using cross-hospital 859 human serum samples from lung adenocarcinoma, benign lung nodules, and healthy individuals, DeepMSProfiler successfully differentiates the metabolomic profiles of different groups (AUC 0.99) and detects early-stage lung adenocarcinoma (accuracy 0.961). Model flow and ablation experiments demonstrate that DeepMSProfiler overcomes inter-hospital variability and effects of unknown metabolites signals. Our ensemble strategy removes background-category phenomena in multi-classification deep-learning models, and the novel interpretability enables direct access to disease-related metabolite-protein networks. Further applying to lipid metabolomic data unveils correlations of important metabolites and proteins. Overall, DeepMSProfiler offers a straightforward and reliable method for disease diagnosis and mechanism discovery, enhancing its broad applicability.

Large-scale drug discovery and repurposing is challenging. Identifying the mechanism of action (MOA) is crucial, yet current approaches are costly and low-throughput. Here we present an approach for MOA identification by profiling changes in mitochondrial phenotypes. By temporally imaging mitochondrial morphology and membrane potential, we established a pipeline for monitoring time-resolved mitochondrial images, resulting in a dataset comprising 570,096 single-cell images of cells exposed to 1,068 United States Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs. A deep learning model named MitoReID, using a re-identification (ReID) framework and an Inflated 3D ResNet backbone, was developed. It achieved 76.32% Rank-1 and 65.92% mean average precision on the testing set and successfully identified the MOAs for six untrained drugs on the basis of mitochondrial phenotype. Furthermore, MitoReID identified cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition as the MOA of the natural compound epicatechin in tea, which was successfully validated in vitro. Our approach thus provides an automated and cost-effective alternative for target identification that could accelerate large-scale drug discovery and repurposing.

Cellular phenotypic heterogeneity is an important hallmark of many biological processes and understanding its origins remains a substantial challenge. This heterogeneity often reflects variations in the chromatin structure, influenced by factors such as viral infections and cancer, which dramatically reshape the cellular landscape. To address the challenge of identifying distinct cell states, we developed artificial intelligence of the nucleus (AINU), a deep learning method that can identify specific nuclear signatures at the nanoscale resolution. AINU can distinguish different cell states based on the spatial arrangement of core histone H3, RNA polymerase II or DNA from super-resolution microscopy images. With only a small number of images as the training data, AINU correctly identifies human somatic cells, human-induced pluripotent stem cells, very early stage infected cells transduced with DNA herpes simplex virus type 1 and even cancer cells after appropriate retraining. Finally, using AI interpretability methods, we find that the RNA polymerase II localizations in the nucleoli aid in distinguishing human-induced pluripotent stem cells from their somatic cells. Overall, AINU coupled with super-resolution microscopy of nuclear structures provides a robust tool for the precise detection of cellular heterogeneity, with considerable potential for advancing diagnostics and therapies in regenerative medicine, virology and cancer biology.

Diagnosing liver lesions is crucial for treatment choices and patient outcomes. This study develops an automatic diagnosis system for liver lesions using multiphase enhanced computed tomography (CT). A total of 4039 patients from six data centers are enrolled to develop Liver Lesion Network (LiLNet). LiLNet identifies focal liver lesions, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC), metastatic tumors (MET), focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH), hemangioma (HEM), and cysts (CYST). Validated in four external centers and clinically verified in two hospitals, LiLNet achieves an accuracy (ACC) of 94.7% and an area under the curve (AUC) of 97.2% for benign and malignant tumors. For HCC, ICC, and MET, the ACC is 88.7% with an AUC of 95.6%. For FNH, HEM, and CYST, the ACC is 88.6% with an AUC of 95.9%. LiLNet can aid in clinical diagnosis, especially in regions with a shortage of radiologists.

Disruption of retinal vasculature is linked to various diseases, including diabetic retinopathy and macular degeneration, leading to vision loss. We present here a novel algorithmic approach that generates highly realistic digital models of human retinal blood vessels, based on established biophysical principles, including fully-connected arterial and venous trees with a single inlet and outlet. This approach, using physics-informed generative adversarial networks (PI-GAN), enables the segmentation and reconstruction of blood vessel networks with no human input and which out-performs human labelling. Segmentation of DRIVE and STARE retina photograph datasets provided near state-of-the-art vessel segmentation, with training on only a small (n= 100) simulated dataset. Our findings highlight the potential of PI-GAN for accurate retinal vasculature characterization, with implications for improving early disease detection, monitoring disease progression, and improving patient care.

To assess the value of deep learning in selecting the optimal embryo for in vitro fertilization, a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, noninferiority parallel-group trial was conducted across 14 in vitro fertilization clinics in Australia and Europe. Women under 42 years of age with at least two early-stage blastocysts on day 5 were randomized to either the control arm, using standard morphological assessment, or the study arm, employing a deep learning algorithm, intelligent Data Analysis Score (iDAScore), for embryo selection. The primary endpoint was a clinical pregnancy rate with a noninferiority margin of 5%. The trial included 1,066 patients (533 in the iDAScore group and 533 in the morphology group). The iDAScore group exhibited a clinical pregnancy rate of 46.5% (248 of 533 patients), compared to 48.2% (257 of 533 patients) in the morphology arm (risk difference −1.7%; 95% confidence interval −7.7, 4.3;P= 0.62). This study was not able to demonstrate noninferiority of deep learning for clinical pregnancy rate when compared to standard morphology and a predefined prioritization scheme. Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (ANZCTR) registration:379161.

Artificial neural networks, deep-learning methods and the backpropagation algorithm1form the foundation of modern machine learning and artificial intelligence. These methods are almost always used in two phases, one in which the weights of the network are updated and one in which the weights are held constant while the network is used or evaluated. This contrasts with natural learning and many applications, which require continual learning. It has been unclear whether or not deep learning methods work in continual learning settings. Here we show that they do not—that standard deep-learning methods gradually lose plasticity in continual-learning settings until they learn no better than a shallow network. We show such loss of plasticity using the classic ImageNet dataset and reinforcement-learning problems across a wide range of variations in the network and the learning algorithm. Plasticity is maintained indefinitely only by algorithms that continually inject diversity into the network, such as our continual backpropagation algorithm, a variation of backpropagation in which a small fraction of less-used units are continually and randomly reinitialized. Our results indicate that methods based on gradient descent are not enough—that sustained deep learning requires a random, non-gradient component to maintain variability and plasticity.

Annotating active sites in enzymes is crucial for advancing multiple fields including drug discovery, disease research, enzyme engineering, and synthetic biology. Despite the development of numerous automated annotation algorithms, a significant trade-off between speed and accuracy limits their large-scale practical applications. We introduce EasIFA, an enzyme active site annotation algorithm that fuses latent enzyme representations from the Protein Language Model and 3D structural encoder, and then aligns protein-level information with the knowledge of enzymatic reactions using a multi-modal cross-attention framework. EasIFA outperforms BLASTp with a 10-fold speed increase and improved recall, precision, f1 score, and MCC by 7.57%, 13.08%, 9.68%, and 0.1012, respectively. It also surpasses empirical-rule-based algorithm and other state-of-the-art deep learning annotation method based on PSSM features, achieving a speed increase ranging from 650 to 1400 times while enhancing annotation quality. This makes EasIFA a suitable replacement for conventional tools in both industrial and academic settings. EasIFA can also effectively transfer knowledge gained from coarsely annotated enzyme databases to smaller, high-precision datasets, highlighting its ability to model sparse and high-quality databases. Additionally, EasIFA shows potential as a catalytic site monitoring tool for designing enzymes with desired functions beyond their natural distribution.

Methane emissions from the oil and gas sector are a large contributor to climate change. Robust emission quantification and source attribution are needed for mitigating methane emissions, requiring a transparent, comprehensive, and accurate geospatial database of oil and gas infrastructure. Realizing such a database is hindered by data gaps nationally and globally. To fill these gaps, we present a deep learning approach on freely available, high-resolution satellite imagery for automatically mapping well pads and storage tanks. We validate the results in the Permian and Denver-Julesburg basins, two high-producing basins in the United States. Our approach achieves high performance on expert-curated datasets of well pads (Precision = 0.955, Recall = 0.904) and storage tanks (Precision = 0.962, Recall = 0.968). When deployed across the entire basins, the approach captures a majority of well pads in existing datasets (79.5%) and detects a substantial number (>70,000) of well pads not present in those datasets. Furthermore, we detect storage tanks (>169,000) on well pads, which were not mapped in existing datasets. We identify remaining challenges with the approach, which, when solved, should enable a globally scalable and public framework for mapping well pads, storage tanks, and other oil and gas infrastructure.

Recent developments in Deep Learning have opened the possibility for automated segmentation of large and highly detailed CT scan datasets of fossil material. However, previous methodologies have required large amounts of training data to reliably extract complex skeletal structures. Here we present a method for automated Deep Learning segmentation to obtain high-fidelity 3D models of fossils digitally extracted from the surrounding rock, training the model with less than 1%-2% of the total CT dataset. This workflow has the capacity to revolutionise the use of Deep Learning to significantly reduce the processing time of such data and boost the availability of segmented CT-scanned fossil material for future research outputs. Our final Unet segmentation model achieved a validation Dice similarity of 0.96.

Many antimicrobial peptides directly disrupt bacterial membranes yet can also damage mammalian membranes. It is therefore central to their therapeutic use that rules governing the membrane selectivity of antimicrobial peptides be deciphered. However, this is difficult even for short peptides owing to the large combinatorial space of amino acid sequences. Here we describe a method for measuring the loss or maintenance of antimicrobial-peptide activity for thousands of peptide-sequence variants simultaneously, and its application to Protegrin-1, a potent yet toxic antimicrobial peptide, to determine the positional importance and flexibility of residues across its sequence while identifying variants with changes in membrane selectivity. More bacterially selective variants maintained a membrane-bound secondary structure while avoiding aromatic residues and cysteine pairs. A machine-learning model trained with our datasets accurately predicted membrane-specific activities for over 5.7 million Protegrin-1 variants, and identified one variant that showed substantially reduced toxicity and retention of activity in a mouse model of intraperitoneal infection. The high-throughput methodology may help elucidate sequence–structure–function relationships in antimicrobial peptides and inform the design of peptide-based synthetic drugs.

The interaction of condensed phase systems with external electric fields is of major importance in a myriad of processes in nature and technology, ranging from the field-directed motion of cells (galvanotaxis), to geochemistry and the formation of ice phases on planets, to field-directed chemical catalysis and energy storage and conversion systems including supercapacitors, batteries and solar cells. Molecular simulation in the presence of electric fields would give important atomistic insight into these processes but applications of the most accurate methods such as ab-initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) are limited in scope by their computational expense. Here we introduce Perturbed Neural Network Potential Molecular Dynamics (PNNP MD) to push back the accessible time and length scales of such simulations. We demonstrate that important dielectric properties of liquid water including the field-induced relaxation dynamics, the dielectric constant and the field-dependent IR spectrum can be machine learned up to surprisingly high field strengths of about 0.2 V Å−1without loss in accuracy when compared to ab-initio molecular dynamics. This is remarkable because, in contrast to most previous approaches, the two neural networks on which PNNP MD is based are exclusively trained on molecular configurations sampled from zero-field MD simulations, demonstrating that the networks not only interpolate but also reliably extrapolate the field response. PNNP MD is based on rigorous theory yet it is simple, general, modular, and systematically improvable allowing us to obtain atomistic insight into the interaction of a wide range of condensed phase systems with external electric fields.

